QES-Winds: Fast-response Wind Solver
====================================

Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

A new dispersion modeling system based on the well-used FORTRAN-based
QUIC (Quick Urban and Industrial Complex) dispersion modeling system
originally developed by the University of Utah and Los Alamos National
Laboratory :cite:`brown2013quic`, has been under development as
collaboration between the University of Utah and the University of
Minnesota, Duluth. Quick Environmental Simulation (QES) is a
microclimate simulation platform for computing 3D environmental scalars
in urban areas and over complex terrain. Figure `[fig:QES] <#fig:QES>`__
shows a schematic of QES system and how different elements of the system
interact with each other.

The fast-response three-dimensional diagnostic wind model written in
C++, QES-Winds, is a rapid mass conserving wind-field solver. QES-Winds
utilizes the concept of dynamic parallelism in CUDA to substantially
accelerate wind simulations. Figure `[fig:Winds] <#fig:Winds>`__ shows a
high-level flowchart for QES-Winds code.

.. figure:: Images/QES_flowchart.png
   :width: 17cm

   Flowchart for the QES-Winds wind solver

QES-Winds Domain
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first step in every computational code or package is to define the
computational domain. The user can define the domain by specifying the
number of cells in :math:`x`, :math:`y` and :math:`z` directions as well
as the cell size in each direction in the input file (XML file).

XML Example
^^^^^^^^^^^

The domain information (number of cells and cell size) are defined under
the <simulationParameters> part of the XML file. Following is an example
of a domain with :math:`2` km by :math:`2` km by :math:`200` m and
resolution of :math:`2` m by :math:`2` m by :math:`2` m:

.. code:: xml

   <simulationParameters>
       <domain> 1000 1000 100 </domain>                    <!-- Number of cells in x,y and z directions-->
       <cellSize> 2.0 2.0 2.0 </cellSize>              <!-- Mesh resolution (meters)-->
   </simulationParameters>

Staggered Grid
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

QES-Winds discretizes the computational domain using a staggered grid as
shown in Figure `[fig:staggered_grid] <#fig:staggered_grid>`__. The
velocity components (:math:`u`, :math:`v` and :math:`w`) are
face-centered values and Lagrange multipliers (:math:`\lambda`),
divergence of the initial wind field (:math:`R`) and solver coefficients
(:math:`e`, :math:`f`, :math:`g`, :math:`h`, :math:`m` and :math:`n`)
are cell-centered variables. Because of nature of the finite difference
method (depending on neighboring cells values), the first and last cells
in :math:`x` and :math:`y` directions and the last cell in :math:`z`
direction, are not updated in the solving process (their velocity
remains as the same as the initial velocity field). For the same reason,
there is a layer of ghost cells under the bottom surface to make
velocity calculation in the first layer above the bottom surface
possible. The values of the Lagrange multipliers for the ghost cells are
set to the ones for the layer above the bottom surface to create a zero
gradient for the Lagrange multipliers (boundary condition) as well as
providing the neighboring cell for the finite difference method.

.. figure:: Images/staggered_grid_full.png

   Staggered grid representation of the domain and location of each
   variable.

Halo Region
^^^^^^^^^^^

If a solid element (building or terrain) overlaps with the QES domain
boundaries, QES-Winds cannot model the wind field around the element
correctly. In order to prevent this phenomenon, the user can add buffer
zones to the sides of the domain when a terrain file or an ESRI
shapefile is read into the code. Figure `[fig:halo] <#fig:halo>`__
represents how the halo region is added to the domain around a Digital
Elevation Model (DEM) or a shapefile.

.. figure:: Images/domain_halo.png
   :width: 11cm

   Representation of halo region around the domain.

In order to define length of the halo zone in :math:`x` and :math:`y`
direction, the user can use <halox> and <haloy> under
<simulationParameters>. When the halo zone is defined, the length of the
domain (:math:`nx*dx`) and (:math:`ny*dy`), should be greater than or
equal to length of the DEM or shapefile in each direction plus twice the
length of the halo in :math:`x` and :math:`y` directions, respectively.

.. code:: xml

   <simulationParameters>
       <halo_x> 20.0 </halo_x>                     <!-- Halo region added to x-direction of domain (at the beginning and the end of domain) (meters)-->
       <halo_y> 30.0 </halo_y>                     <!-- Halo region added to y-direction of domain (at the beginning and the end of domain) (meters)-->
   </simulationParameters>

Digital Elevation Model (DEM) and ESRI Shapefile
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The current version of QES-Winds has been written to allow commonly
available terrain and building geometry datasets to be used for
simulations. In this section, various input file formats for QES-Winds
will be covered.

Terrain Features
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Using the Geospatial Data Abstraction Library (GDAL;
https://www.gdal.org), we are able to load geo-referenced datasets of
terrain so that the simulations can include the effects of hills,
valleys, and mountains. In the current version of the code, we can load
Digital Elevation Model (DEM) files for different physical locations.

Using the Digital Elevation Model (DEM) file loaders in our code base,
we have loaded and tested multiple different terrain data sets. As a
first test, we loaded a DEM of Askervein Hill. This is an isolated hill
in Scotland where field experiments have been conducted and data for
testing and evaluation exists
(:cite:`taylor1987askervein,mickle1988askervein`). The simulation with
Askervein Hill was run without any complex terrain flow
parameterizations. The Askervein Hill dataset is :math:`6023.43` m by
:math:`6023.43` m. The hill height is approximately :math:`124` m tall.
Figure `[fig:askervein] <#fig:askervein>`__ indicates the cell type
contour for the Askervin hill test case in a vertical plane at
:math:`y = 3000` m (part (a)), and a horizontal plane at :math:`z=20` m
(part (b)). These plots show the ability of QES-Winds to read in and
process DEM files. The cell type value :math:`1` (blue) represents the
air cells while value :math:`2` (red) indicates the terrain cells.

.. container:: float

   .. figure:: Images/askervein_y_3000_icell.png
      :width: 13cm

   .. figure:: Images/askervein_z_20_icell.png
      :width: 13cm

The user can define the address to the DEM using <DEM> variable under
the <simulationParameters> part in the XML file:

.. code:: xml

   <simulationParameters>
       <DEM>../scratch/DEM/askervein.tif</DEM>             <!-- Address to DEM location-->
   </simulationParameters>

Process Part of DEM
'''''''''''''''''''

In some cases, user wants to load a giant DEM but only process part of
the file. This is possible in QES-Winds by defining the origin of QES
domain inside the DEM borders and the size of the QES domain. Figure
`[fig:DEM_cut] <#fig:DEM_cut>`__ shows a schematic of how the QES domain
can be defined inside a DEM file and only process that part.

.. figure:: Images/DEM_cut.png
   :width: 13cm

   Schematic of how the QES domain can be defined inside a DEM file and
   only process that part.

There are two options to determine the location of the origin of QES
domain inside the DEM borders:

#. Specifying the distance of the QES origin with respect to bottom left
   corner of the DEM file. This can be done by setting the value of
   <originFlag> to :math:`0` and defining distances (in meters) in
   :math:`x` and :math:`y` directions using <DEMDistancex> and
   <DEMDistancey>, respectively.

   .. code:: xml

      <simulationParameters>
          <originFlag> 0 </originFlag>                    <!-- Origin flag (0- DEM coordinates (default), 1- UTM coordinates) -->
            <DEMDistancex> 1000.0 </DEMDistancex>                 <!-- x component (m) of origin in DEM coordinates (if originFlag = 0) -->
            <DEMDistancey> 1000.0 </DEMDistancey>                 <!-- y component (m) of origin in DEM coordinates (if originFlag = 0) -->
      </simulationParameters>

#. Defining the location of the QES domain origin in the Universal
   Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates by setting the value of
   <originFlag> to :math:`1` and determining <UTMx> and <UTMy> of the
   origin in :math:`x` and :math:`y` directions, respectively.

   .. code:: xml

      <simulationParameters>
          <originFlag> 1 </originFlag>                    <!-- Origin flag (0- DEM coordinates (default), 1- UTM coordinates) -->
            <UTMx> 595469.6122881 </UTMx>                     <!-- x component (m) of origin in UTM DEM coordinates (if originFlag = 1)-->
            <UTMy> 6336281.9538635 </UTMy>                    <!-- y component (m) of origin in UTM DEM coordinates (if originFlag = 1)-->
      </simulationParameters>

Automated City Building
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A new shapefile reader function has been added to QES-Winds, which
provides the capacity to load the ESRI shapefiles using GDAL (Geospatial
Data Abstraction Library) libraries. After the building footprints and
heights are loaded from ESRI shapefiles, QES-Winds creates polygon
buildings and applies appropriate parameterization to them. Figure
`[fig:okc_qgis] <#fig:okc_qgis>`__ shows an example ESRI shapefile can
be read into QES-Winds, Central Business District (CBD) of Oklahoma City
shapefile, subject to JU2003 experimental campaign
:cite:`allwine2006joint`, plotted using the freely available software
QGIS (`https://qgis.orgg <https://qgis.org>`__). The cell type contour
for the Oklahoma City test case in a horizontal plane at :math:`z=3` m
is shown in Figure `[fig:okc_icell] <#fig:okc_icell>`__. This plot
indicates the ability of QES-Winds to read in and process ESRI
shapefiles. The cell type value :math:`0` (blue) represents the building
cells while value :math:`1` (red) indicates the air cells.

.. figure:: Images/OKC.png
   :width: 13cm

   Central Business District (CBD) of Oklahoma City shapefile, subject
   to JU2003 experimental campaign :cite:`allwine2006joint`, plotted
   using the freely available software QGIS.

.. figure:: Images/oklahoma_z_3_icell.png

   Cell type contour for the Oklahoma City test case in a horizontal
   plane at :math:`z=3` m. The cell type value :math:`0` (blue)
   represents the building cells while value :math:`1` (red) indicates
   the air cells.

The user can define the address to the shapefile using <SHP> variable as
well as the name of the shapefile using the <SHPBuildingLayer> and the
correlation factor between the height field of the shapefile and the
actual height of the buildings using the <heightFactor> under
<simulationParameters> part in the XML file:

.. code:: xml

   <simulationParameters>
       <SHP>../data/GISFiles/OKCSmallDomain/OKCSmallDomainJU2003.shp</SHP> <!-- Address to shapefile location-->
       <SHPBuildingLayer>OKCSmallDomainJU2003</SHPBuildingLayer>
       <heightFactor> 1.0 </heightFactor>              <!-- Height factor multiplied by the building height read in from the shapefile (default = 1.0)-->
   </simulationParameters>

.. _`sec:building`:

Import Building From XML
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Instead of reading in a ESRI shapefile, the user can import building
information manually through the XML file. This can be done by using the
<buildings> section of the XML file. The only option available for now
is the rectangular building. Information required for defining a
rectangular building are height, base height, length, width, location of
the closest corner to the origin of domain and building rotational
angle. Following is an example of a rectangular building with :math:`40`
m as height, :math:`0` m as base height, :math:`20` m as length and
width, closest corner to the origin located at :math:`90` m in :math:`x`
and :math:`y` directions, and :math:`0^{\circ}` as rotation angle with
respect to the North-South line. Also, :math:`0.1` m is defined as the
surface roughness for all the building walls.

.. code:: xml

   <buildings>
       <wallRoughness> 0.1 </wallRoughness>
       <rectangularBuilding>
           <height> 40.0 </height>
           <baseHeight> 0 </baseHeight>
           <xStart> 90.0 </xStart>
           <yStart> 90.0 </yStart>
           <length> 20.0 </length>
           <width> 20.0 </width>
           <buildingRotation> 0.0 </buildingRotation>
       </rectangularBuilding>
   </buildings>

Initial Wind Field
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

QES-Winds can read a single or multiple sensors for a specific test
case. In this context, sensor means the velocity magnitude and direction
at a single point or a single velocity profile to initialize the wind
field. If there is only the wind velocity and direction at a single
point, the user should specify what type of velocity profile they want
to build from the measurement. There are three options available for the
type of profile:

#. a logarithmic profile :cite:`favaloro2008toward`:

   .. math::

      \label{eq:log_law}
      u_{log}(z) = u_{ref}\cdot\frac{ln(z/z_0)}{ln(z_{ref}/z_0)}

#. a power law profile :cite:`favaloro2008toward`:

   .. math::

      \label{eq:power_law}
      u_{pow}(z) = u_{ref}\cdot(z/z_{ref})^{z_0}

#. an urban canopy profile :cite:`favaloro2008toward,pardyjak2008near`:

   .. math::

      \label{eq:urban_canopy_low}
      u_{uc}(z)=\begin{cases}
      u(H)\cdot\exp(\alpha(\frac{z}{H}-1)) & \text{if} z\leq H\\
      u(H)\cdot\exp(\alpha(\frac{z}{H}-1))& \text{if} z > H.
      \end{cases}

   where :math:`u_{ref}` is the measured velocity at measured height
   :math:`z_{ref}`, :math:`z_0` is the surface roughness. The lower
   portion of the urban canopy profile calculated where :math:`\alpha`
   is a factor that depends on canopy element density (attenuation
   coefficient) and :math:`u(H)` is the computed velocity at height
   :math:`H`. The upper portion of the urban canopy is a different form
   of a logarithmic profile where :math:`u_*` is the friction velocity,
   :math:`\kappa` is the von Karman constant at  0.4 and :math:`d` is
   the zero plane displacement.

If there is only one sensor available in the computational domain, the
code will extend the profile for that sensor uniformly to the whole
domain. On the occasion of multiple sensors, QES-Winds utilizes a
two-dimensional Barnes interpolation scheme
:cite:`koch1983interactive,booth2012validation` to interpolate velocity
components at each cell height of the domain based on the weighted
distance from each sensor.

.. _`sec:sensor_xml`:

XML Setup
^^^^^^^^^

There are two options available for defining sensor information:

#. The user can put all the sensor information in a separate XML file
   and define the address to the location of the sensor file using the
   <sensorName> variable.

   .. code:: xml

      <metParams>
          <z0_domain_flag> 0 </z0_domain_flag>                    <!-- Distribution of surface roughness for domain (0-uniform (default), 1-custom -->
          <sensorName>../data/InputFiles/sensor.xml</sensorName>  <!-- Name of the sensor file with information for the sensor included -->
      </metParams>

#. The user can define all information required for creating a sensor by
   using the <sensor> variable inside the <metParams> section of the XML
   file.

   The first part of the sensor information is the location of the
   sensor in domain. There are three options for it: 1) define the
   location in local coordinates of the QES domain.

   .. code:: xml

      <metParams>
          <sensor>
              <site_coord_flag> 1 </site_coord_flag>          <!-- Sensor site coordinate system (1=QES (default), 2=UTM, 3=Lat/Lon) -->
            <site_xcoord> 1.0  </site_xcoord>                 <!-- x component of site location in QES domain (m) (if site_coord_flag = 1) -->
            <site_ycoord> 1.0 </site_ycoord>              <!-- y component of site location in QES domain (m) (if site_coord_flag = 1)-->
          </sensor>
      </metParams>

#. The user can define the location in the Universal Transverse Mercator
   (UTM) coordinates. In this case, user also needs to define the origin
   of computational domain in the UTM coordinates.

   .. code:: xml

      <simulationParameters>
        <UTMx> 634173 </UTMx>                         <!-- x component (m) of origin in UTM -->
          <UTMy> 3925360 </UTMy>                      <!-- y component (m) of origin in UTM -->
          <UTMZone> 14 </UTMZone>                         <!-- UTM zone that domain located -->
      </simulationParameters>

   .. code:: xml

      <metParams>
          <sensor>
              <site_coord_flag> 2 </site_coord_flag>          <!-- Sensor site coordinate system (1=QES (default), 2=UTM, 3=Lat/Lon) -->
            <site_UTM_x> 634175 </site_UTM_x>                 <!-- x components of site coordinate in UTM (if site_coord_flag = 2) -->
            <site_UTM_y> 3925362 </site_UTM_y>                <!-- y components of site coordinate in UTM (if site_coord_flag = 2)-->
            <site_UTM_zone> 14 </site_UTM_zone>               <!-- UTM zone of the sensor site (if site_coord_flag = 2)-->
          </sensor>
      </metParams>

#. The user can define the location in Latitude and Longitude
   coordinates. In this case, user also needs to define the origin of
   computational domain in the UTM coordinates.

   .. code:: xml

      <simulationParameters>
        <UTMx> 634173 </UTMx>                         <!-- x component (m) of origin in UTM -->
          <UTMy> 3925360 </UTMy>                      <!-- y component (m) of origin in UTM -->
          <UTMZone> 14 </UTMZone>                         <!-- UTM zone that domain located -->
      </simulationParameters>

   .. code:: xml

      <metParams>
          <sensor>
              <site_coord_flag> 3 </site_coord_flag>          <!-- Sensor site coordinate system (1=QES (default), 2=UTM, 3=Lat/Lon) -->
            <site_lat> 35.46270 </site_lat>               <!-- x components of site coordinate in Latitude (if site_coord_flag = 3) -->
            <site_lat> -97.52130 </site_lat>              <!-- y components of site coordinate in Longitude (if site_coord_flag = 3)-->
          </sensor>
      </metParams>

The second part of sensor definition is choosing type of profile for
different time steps, if applicable. The <timeSeries> variable is
designed to define type of sensor profile in the sensor section for
several time steps. There are four options for the input profile in
QES-Winds:

#. Logarithmic velocity profile, based on Eq.
   `[eq:log_law] <#eq:log_law>`__:

   .. code:: xml

      <metParams>
          <sensor>
              <timeSeries>                        <!-- Start of timestep informastion for a sensor -->
                  <boundaryLayerFlag> 1 </boundaryLayerFlag>      <!-- Site boundary layer flag (1-log (default), 2-exp, 3-urban canopy, 4-data entry) -->
                  <siteZ0> 0.1 </siteZ0>                  <!-- Site z0 -->
                  <reciprocal> 0.0 </reciprocal>              <!-- Reciprocal Monin-Obukhov Length (1/m) -->
                  <height> 20.0 </height>                 <!-- Height of the sensor -->
                  <speed> 5.0 </speed>                    <!-- Measured speed at the sensor height -->
                  <direction> 270.0 </direction>              <!-- Wind direction of sensor -->
               </timeSeries>
          </sensor>
      </metParams>

   Figure `[fig:log_profile] <#fig:log_profile>`__ shows velocity
   magnitude contour with overlaying velocity vectors of initial
   velocity field created by the aforementioned example of the
   logarithmic profile.

   .. figure:: Images/log_y_101.png

      Velocity magnitude contour with overlaying velocity vectors in a
      vertical plane at :math:`y=101` m for initial velocity field
      created by the logarithmic profile.

#. Exponential (power law) velocity profile, based on Eq.
   `[eq:power_law] <#eq:power_law>`__:

   .. code:: xml

      <metParams>
          <sensor>
              <timeSeries>                        <!-- Start of timestep informastion for a sensor -->
                  <boundaryLayerFlag> 2 </boundaryLayerFlag>      <!-- Site boundary layer flag (1-log (default), 2-exp, 3-urban canopy, 4-data entry) -->
                  <siteZ0> 0.1 </siteZ0>                  <!-- Site z0 -->
                  <reciprocal> 0.0 </reciprocal>              <!-- Reciprocal Monin-Obukhov Length (1/m) -->
                  <height> 20.0 </height>                 <!-- Height of the sensor -->
                  <speed> 5.0 </speed>                    <!-- Measured speed at the sensor height -->
                  <direction> 270.0 </direction>              <!-- Wind direction of sensor -->
               </timeSeries>
          </sensor>
      </metParams>

   Figure `[fig:exp] <#fig:exp>`__ shows velocity magnitude contour with
   overlaying velocity vectors of the initial velocity field created by
   the aforementioned example of the exponential (power law) profile.

   .. figure:: Images/exp_y_101.png

      Velocity magnitude contour with overlaying velocity vectors in a
      vertical plane at :math:`y=101` m for initial velocity field
      created by the exponential (power law) profile.

#. Urban canopy velocity profile, based on Eq.
   `[eq:urban_canopy_low] <#eq:urban_canopy_low>`__ and
   `[eq:urban_canopy_up] <#eq:urban_canopy_up>`__:

   .. code:: xml

      <metParams>
          <sensor>
              <timeSeries>                        <!-- Start of timestep informastion for a sensor -->
                  <boundaryLayerFlag> 3 </boundaryLayerFlag>      <!-- Site boundary layer flag (1-log (default), 2-exp, 3-urban canopy, 4-data entry) -->
                  <siteZ0> 0.1 </siteZ0>                  <!-- Site z0 -->
                  <reciprocal> 0.0 </reciprocal>              <!-- Reciprocal Monin-Obukhov Length (1/m) -->
                  <height> 20.0 </height>                 <!-- Height of the sensor -->
                  <speed> 5.0 </speed>                    <!-- Measured speed at the sensor height -->
                  <direction> 270.0 </direction>              <!-- Wind direction of sensor -->
                    <canopyHeight> 10.0 </canopyHeight>
                    <attenuationCoefficient> 1.0 </attenuationCoefficient>
               </timeSeries>
          </sensor>
      </metParams>

   Figure `[fig:canopy] <#fig:canopy>`__ shows velocity magnitude
   contour with overlaying velocity vectors of the initial velocity
   field created by the aforementioned example of the urban canopy
   profile.

   .. figure:: Images/canopy_y_101.png

      Velocity magnitude contour with overlaying velocity vectors in a
      vertical plane at :math:`y=101` m for initial velocity field
      created by the urban canopy profile.

#. Data entry of the profile from an experimental tower with multiple
   sensors or from a numerical mesoscale weather prediction model like
   WRF :cite:`powers2017weather`:

   .. code:: xml

      <metParams>
          <sensor>
              <timeSeries>                        <!-- Start of timestep informastion for a sensor -->
                  <boundaryLayerFlag> 4 </boundaryLayerFlag>          <!-- Site boundary layer flag (1-log, 2-exp, 3-urban canopy, 4-data entry) -->
                <siteZ0> 0.1 </siteZ0>                                    <!-- Site z0 -->
                <reciprocal> 0.0 </reciprocal>                        <!-- Reciprocal Monin-Obukhov Length (1/m) -->
                <height> 30.7015 </height>                            <!-- Height of the sensor -->
                <height> 74.4169 </height>
                <height> 144.644 </height>
                <height> 197.455 </height>
                <height> 268.468 </height>
                <speed> 2.56922 </speed>                          <!-- Measured speed at the sensor height -->
                <speed> 2.55532 </speed>
                <speed> 2.33319 </speed>
                <speed> 2.16058 </speed>
                <speed> 1.98843 </speed>
                <direction> 323.283 </direction>                  <!-- Wind direction of sensor -->
                <direction> 327.377 </direction>
                <direction> 332.676 </direction>
                <direction> 337.649 </direction>
                <direction> 344.273 </direction>
              </timeSeries>
          </sensor>
      </metParams>

Empirical Parameterizations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

QES-Winds only conserves mass and no momentum equation is solved. As a
result, the solution is a potential-flow solution (no shear effects). In
order to add shear effects to our solution, empirical parameterizations
are needed. These parameterizations are designed using results of
experiments and computational simulations (e.g.
:cite:`singh2008evaluation,brown2013quic`). Buildings are the most
important elements in urban areas. There are several parameterizations
developed for different areas around the building. This section covers
available parameterizations in QES-Winds along with their effects on the
wind field.

Upwind Cavity
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Upwind cavity as described in
:cite:`nelson20085,bagal2004improved,gowardhan2010evaluation` is the
parameterization representing upwind and stagnation effects of the
building on the fluid flow. There are three options available for this
type of parameterization in QES-Winds. The first option based on the
parameterization proposed by Röckle :cite:`rockle1990bestimmung` and
later Kaplan and Dinar :cite:`kaplan1996lagrangian`. They defined an
ellipsoid to represent what they call is the displacement zone in front
of the building. The length of the displacement zone, :math:`L_F`, is
defined by Eq. `[eq:lf] <#eq:lf>`__. The shape of the ellipsoid is
estimated by Eq. `[eq:upwind] <#eq:upwind>`__. Finally, the initial
velocity components in the displacement zone are set to zero.

.. math::

   \frac{L_{\mathrm{F}}}{H}=\frac{2(W / H)}{1+0.8 W / H}
   \label{eq:lf}

.. math::

   \frac{X^{2}}{L_{\mathrm{F}}^{2}\left(1-(Z / 0.6 H)^{2}\right)}+\frac{Y^{2}}{W^{2}}=1
   \label{eq:upwind}

where :math:`L`, :math:`H` and :math:`W` are length, width and height of
the building, receptively.

Part (a) of Figure `[fig:upwind_1_vert] <#fig:upwind_1_vert>`__ and
Figure `[fig:upwind_1_horiz] <#fig:upwind_1_horiz>`__ show cell type
contour to represent the area of effect of the Röckle upwind cavity
parameterization in a vertical plane at :math:`y=100` m and a horizontal
plane at :math:`z=5` m, respectively. The upwind parameterizations is
applied to a rectangular building defined in Section
`4.3 <#sec:building>`__. The initial guess field is constructed using a
single sensor with logarithmic profile as defined in
`5.1 <#sec:sensor_xml>`__. Parts (b) and (c) of Figure
`[fig:upwind_1_vert] <#fig:upwind_1_vert>`__ and Figure
`[fig:upwind_1_horiz] <#fig:upwind_1_horiz>`__ indicate velocity
magnitude contour with overlaying velocity vectors of initial (part (b))
and final (part(c)) velocity fields in a vertical plane at :math:`y=100`
m and a horizontal plane at :math:`z=5` m, respectively.

.. container:: float

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_y_100_1_init_icell.png
      :width: 10.3cm

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_y_100_1_init_vel.png
      :width: 11cm

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_y_100_1_final.png
      :width: 11cm

.. container:: float

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_z_5_1_init_icell.png
      :width: 10.3cm

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_z_5_1_init_vel.png
      :width: 11cm

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_z_5_1_final.png
      :width: 11cm

The second option is called the Modified Vortex Parameterization (MVP)
and created by Bagal et al. :cite:`bagal2004improved`. In this
parameterization, the length of the displacement zone, :math:`L_F`, is
calculated by Eq. `[eq:lf_MVP] <#eq:lf_MVP>`__. The MVP parameterization
defines two ellipsoids instead of one: In the outer ellipsoid,
velocities are reduced to :math:`40\%` of their initial values while in
the inner region, velocity components are set to zero
:cite:`nelson20085`. Both ellipsoids are extended to :math:`0.6` of the
building height.

.. math::

   \frac{L_{\mathrm{F}}}{H}=\frac{1.5(W / H)}{1+0.8 W / H}
   \label{eq:lf_MVP}

where :math:`L`, :math:`H` and :math:`W` are length, width and height of
the building, receptively.

Part (a) of Figure `[fig:upwind_1_vert] <#fig:upwind_1_vert>`__ and
Figure `[fig:upwind_1_horiz] <#fig:upwind_1_horiz>`__ show cell type
contour to represent the area of effect of the MVP upwind cavity
parameterization in a vertical plane at :math:`y=100` m and a horizontal
plane at :math:`z=5` m, respectively. The upwind parameterizations is
applied to a rectangular building defined in Section
`4.3 <#sec:building>`__. The initial guess field is constructed using a
single sensor with logarithmic profile as defined in
`5.1 <#sec:sensor_xml>`__. Parts (b) and (c) of Figure
`[fig:upwind_1_vert] <#fig:upwind_1_vert>`__ and Figure
`[fig:upwind_1_horiz] <#fig:upwind_1_horiz>`__ indicate velocity
magnitude contour with overlaying velocity vectors of initial (part (b))
and final (part(c)) velocity fields in a vertical plane at :math:`y=100`
m and a horizontal plane at :math:`z=5` m, respectively.

.. container:: float

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_y_100_2_init_icell.png
      :width: 10.3cm

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_y_100_2_init_vel.png
      :width: 11cm

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_y_100_2_final.png
      :width: 11cm

.. container:: float

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_z_5_2_init_icell.png
      :width: 10.3cm

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_z_5_2_init_vel.png
      :width: 11cm

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_z_5_2_final.png
      :width: 11cm

The third option is called the high-rise MVP algorithm (HMVP) and is
designed to address the shortcomings of the previous models when it
comes to tall buildings :cite:`nelson20085`. The length of the
displacement zone is calculated the same as Eq.
`[eq:lf_MVP] <#eq:lf_MVP>`__. The HMVP algorithm creates two ellipsoids
with the difference that the inner region only extends to :math:`60\%`
of the minimum of building height and building width. In addition, the
algorithm linearly reduces the velocities in the outer region from their
upwind values at the outer surface to :math:`40\%` of the initial values
on the inner region.

Part (a) of Figure `[fig:upwind_1_vert] <#fig:upwind_1_vert>`__ and
Figure `[fig:upwind_1_horiz] <#fig:upwind_1_horiz>`__ show cell type
contour to represent the area of effect of the HMVP upwind cavity
parameterization in a vertical plane at :math:`y=100` m and a horizontal
plane at :math:`z=5` m, respectively. The upwind parameterization is
applied to a rectangular building defined in Section
`4.3 <#sec:building>`__. The initial guess field is constructed using a
single sensor with logarithmic profile as defined in
`5.1 <#sec:sensor_xml>`__. Parts (b) and (c) of Figure
`[fig:upwind_1_vert] <#fig:upwind_1_vert>`__ and Figure
`[fig:upwind_1_horiz] <#fig:upwind_1_horiz>`__ indicate velocity
magnitude contour with overlaying velocity vectors of initial (part (b))
and final (part(c)) velocity fields in a vertical plane at :math:`y=100`
m and a horizontal plane at :math:`z=5` m, respectively.

.. container:: float

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_y_100_3_init_icell.png
      :width: 10.3cm

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_y_100_3_init_vel.png
      :width: 11cm

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_y_100_3_final.png
      :width: 11cm

.. container:: float

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_z_5_3_init_icell.png
      :width: 10.3cm

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_z_5_3_init_vel.png
      :width: 11cm

   .. figure:: Images/upwind_z_5_3_final.png
      :width: 11cm

In order to choose between these three upwind models, the user needs to
change the value of "upwindCavityFlag" in the XML file.

.. code:: xml

   <simulationParameters>
       <upwindCavityFlag> 2 </upwindCavityFlag>            <!-- Upwind cavity flag (0-none, 1-Rockle, 2-MVP (default), 3-HMVP) -->
   </simulationParameters>

Leeside Cavity and Far-Wake
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The far-wake and cavity parameterization described in
:cite:`singh2005testing,singh2006testing` are a significant part of the
building parameterizations. The one available in QES-Winds is based on
the parameterization proposed by Röckle :cite:`rockle1990bestimmung` and
later Kaplan and Dinar :cite:`kaplan1996lagrangian`. The Röckle
parameterization defines two ellipsoids to represent the shape of the
reversed flow cavity and the far-wake region. The reversed flow cavity
extends to the along-wind cavity length (:math:`L_R`), which is
calculated as Eq. `[eq:Lr] <#eq:Lr>`__, and wake is assumed to be
approximately :math:`3` cavity lengths long (i.e., :math:`3L_R`). After
calculating :math:`L_R`, the cavity length, :math:`d` in the stream-wise
direction was defined by an ellipsoid shape using Eq.
`[eq:d] <#eq:d>`__. Finally, the velocity in the reversed cavity zone is
defined using Eq. `[eq:cavity] <#eq:cavity>`__ and in the wake region,
the velocity field is estimated by Eq. `[eq:wake] <#eq:wake>`__.

.. math::

   \frac{L_{R}}{H}=\frac{1.8 \frac{W}{H}}{\left(\frac{L}{H}\right)^{0.3}\left(1+0.24 \frac{W}{H}\right)}
   \label{eq:Lr}

.. math::

   d=L_{R} \sqrt{\left(1-\left(\frac{z}{H}\right)^{2}\right)\left(1-\left(\frac{y}{W}\right)^{2}\right)}-\frac{L}{2}
   \label{eq:d}

.. math::

   \frac{u(x, y, z)}{U(H)}=-\left(1-\left(\frac{x}{d}\right)^{2}\right)
   \label{eq:cavity}

.. math::

   \frac{u(x, y, z)}{U(H)}=\left(1-\left(\frac{d}{x}\right)^{1.5}\right)
   \label{eq:wake}

where :math:`L`, :math:`H` and :math:`W` are length, width and height of
the building, receptively. :math:`u(x,y,z)` is the velocity at point
:math:`(x,y,z)`, :math:`U(H)` is the reference velocity at height of the
building and :math:`x` is the distance from the building in the
stream-wise direction.

Part (a) of Figure `[fig:wake_vert] <#fig:wake_vert>`__ and Figure
`[fig:wake_horiz] <#fig:wake_horiz>`__ show cell type contour to
represent the area of effect of the Röckle wake parameterization in a
vertical plane at :math:`y=100` m and a horizontal plane at :math:`z=5`
m, respectively. The wake parameterization is applied to a rectangular
building defined in Section `4.3 <#sec:building>`__. The initial guess
field is constructed using a single sensor with logarithmic profile as
defined in `5.1 <#sec:sensor_xml>`__. Parts (b) and (c) of Figure
`[fig:wake_vert] <#fig:wake_vert>`__ and Figure
`[fig:wake_horiz] <#fig:wake_horiz>`__ indicate velocity magnitude
contour with overlaying velocity vectors of initial (part (b)) and final
(part(c)) velocity fields in a vertical plane at :math:`y=100` m and a
horizontal plane at :math:`z=5` m, respectively.

.. container:: float

   .. figure:: Images/wake_y_100_1_init_icell.png
      :width: 10.3cm

   .. figure:: Images/wake_y_100_1_init_vel.png
      :width: 11cm

   .. figure:: Images/wake_y_100_1_final.png
      :width: 11cm

.. container:: float

   .. figure:: Images/wake_z_5_1_init_icell.png
      :width: 10.3cm

   .. figure:: Images/wake_z_5_1_init_vel.png
      :width: 11cm

   .. figure:: Images/wake_z_5_1_final.png
      :width: 11cm

In order to turn on the wake model, the user needs to change the value
of "wakeFlag" in the XML file.

.. code:: xml

   <simulationParameters>
       <wakeFlag> 1 </wakeFlag>                <!-- Wake flag (0-none, 1-Rockle (default)) -->
   </simulationParameters>

Street Canyon
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The street canyon parameterization detailed in
:cite:`singh2008evaluation` represents the effects of two buildings in
close vicinity to each other, on the fluid flow. Röckle
:cite:`rockle1990bestimmung` Introduced velocity parameterizations for
the stream-wise components as in Eq. `[eq:u_can] <#eq:u_can>`__ and the
vertical component as in Eq. `[eq:w_can] <#eq:w_can>`__.

.. math::

   \frac{u(x, y, z)}{U(H)}=-\frac{x_{\mathrm{can}}}{(0.5 S)}\left(\frac{S-x_{\mathrm{can}}}{0.5 S}\right)
   \label{eq:u_can}

.. math::

   \frac{w(x, y, z)}{U(H)}=-\left|\frac{1}{2}\left(1-\frac{x_{\text {can }}}{0.5 S}\right)\right|\left(1-\frac{S-x_{\text {can }}}{0.5 S}\right)
   \label{eq:w_can}

where :math:`S` is the spacing between two buildings and :math:`x_{can}`
is the distance from the backwall of the upwind building.

In order to identify the criteria to determine the existence of a street
canyon, Singh et al. :cite:`singh2008evaluation` utilized the cavity
length, :math:`L_R` (Eq. `[eq:Lr] <#eq:Lr>`__), for the upwind building.
If :math:`S \textless L_R`, the street canyon parameterization is
applied, otherwise, the upwind building is considered as an isolated
building.

Part (a) of Figure `[fig:street_vert] <#fig:street_vert>`__ and Figure
`[fig:street_horiz] <#fig:street_horiz>`__ show cell type contour to
represent the area of effect of the street canyon parameterization in a
vertical plane at :math:`y=100` m and a horizontal plane at :math:`z=5`
m, respectively. The street canyon parameterization is applied to an
area between two rectangular buildings. The upwind building is same as
the one defined in Section `4.3 <#sec:building>`__. The downwind
building is a rectangular building with :math:`20` m as height,
:math:`0` m as base height, :math:`20` m as length and width, closest
corner to the origin located at :math:`90` m in :math:`x` and
:math:`120` m in :math:`y` directions, and :math:`0^{\circ}` as rotation
angle with respect to the North-South line. The initial guess field is
constructed using a single sensor with logarithmic profile as defined in
`5.1 <#sec:sensor_xml>`__. Parts (b) and (c) of Figure
`[fig:street_vert] <#fig:street_vert>`__ and Figure
`[fig:street_horiz] <#fig:street_horiz>`__ indicate velocity magnitude
contour with overlaying velocity vectors of initial (part (b)) and final
(part(c)) velocity fields in a vertical plane at :math:`y=100` m and a
horizontal plane at :math:`z=5` m, respectively.

.. container:: float

   .. figure:: Images/street_y_100_1_init_icell.png
      :width: 10.3cm

   .. figure:: Images/street_y_100_1_init_vel.png
      :width: 11cm

   .. figure:: Images/street_y_100_1_final.png
      :width: 11cm

.. container:: float

   .. figure:: Images/street_z_5_1_init_icell.png
      :width: 10.3cm

   .. figure:: Images/street_z_5_1_init_vel.png
      :width: 11cm

   .. figure:: Images/street_z_5_1_final.png
      :width: 11cm

To turn on the street canyon parameterization, the user needs to change
the value of "streetCanyonFlag" in the XML file.

.. code:: xml

   <simulationParameters>
       <streetCanyonFlag> 1 </streetCanyonFlag>            <!-- Street canyon flag (0-none, 1-Roeckle w/ Fackrel (default)) -->
   </simulationParameters>

Rooftop Recirculation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The rooftop parameterization described in
:cite:`bagal2004implementation,pol2006implementation`, captures the
separation of the flow from the leading edge of the building. It first
checks if the incident flow is in :math:`\pm15^{\circ}` of perpendicular
to the front face. The parameterization then creates an ellipsoidal
region above the building with height of :math:`H_c` (height of the
vortex, calculated by Eq. `[eq:Hc] <#eq:Hc>`__) and length of
:math:`L_c` (length of the vortex, calculated by Eq.
`[eq:Lc] <#eq:Lc>`__). It applies a logarithmic profile in the whole
vortex area and finally, reverses the velocity in region :math:`1`.
Region :math:`1` is an ellipsoidal zone with the same length as the
vortex and half of the height.

.. math:: R=B_{\mathrm{s}}^{2 / 3} B_{l}^{1 / 3}

.. math::

   L_{\mathrm{c}}=0.9 R
   \label{eq:Lc}

.. math::

   H_{\mathrm{c}}=0.22 R
   \label{eq:Hc}

where :math:`B_s` is the smaller of the height (:math:`H`) and the
effective width (:math:`W_{eff}`) of the building, :math:`B_l` is the
larger of :math:`H` and :math:`W_{eff}` , :math:`R` is the vortex size
scaling factor.

Part (a) of Figure `[fig:street_vert] <#fig:street_vert>`__ show cell
type contour to represent the area of effect of the rooftop
parameterization in a vertical plane at :math:`y=100` m. The rooftop
parameterization is applied to a rectangular building with :math:`40` m
as height, :math:`0` m as base height, :math:`40` m as length and width,
closest corner to the origin located at :math:`90` m in :math:`x` and
:math:`y` directions, and :math:`0^{\circ}` as rotation angle with
respect to the North-South line. The initial guess field is constructed
using a single sensor with logarithmic profile as defined in
`5.1 <#sec:sensor_xml>`__. Parts (b) and (c) of Figure
`[fig:street_vert] <#fig:street_vert>`__ indicate velocity magnitude
contour with overlaying velocity vectors of initial (part (b)) and final
(part(c)) velocity fields in a vertical plane at :math:`y=100` m.

.. container:: float

   .. figure:: Images/rooftop_y_100_1_init_icell.png
      :width: 10.3cm

   .. figure:: Images/rooftop_y_100_1_init_vel.png
      :width: 11cm

   .. figure:: Images/rooftop_y_100_1_final.png
      :width: 11cm

To turn the parameterization on, the user needs to change the value of
"rooftopFlag" in the XML file.

.. code:: xml

   <simulationParameters>
       <rooftopFlag> 1 </rooftopFlag>                  <!-- Rooftop flag (0-none, 1-log profile (default)) -->
   </simulationParameters>

Sidewall Recirculation Zone
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The sidewall parameterization is designed to represent the effects of
the edge of the building on the upwind field
:cite:`hayati2017comprehensive`. It first checks if a face has an
outward normal vector nominally (:math:`\pm 10^{\circ}`) perpendicular
to the local wind vector. The important parameters controlling the
sidewall vortex strength and geometry are:

.. math:: R=B_{\mathrm{s}}^{2 / 3} B_{l}^{1 / 3}

.. math:: L_{\mathrm{c}}=0.9 R

.. math:: W_{\mathrm{c}}=0.22 R

where :math:`B_s` is the smaller of the height (:math:`H`) and the
effective width (:math:`W_{eff}`) of the building, :math:`B_l` is the
larger of :math:`H` and :math:`W_{eff}` , :math:`R` is the vortex size
scaling factor, :math:`L_c` is the downwind length of the half-ellipse
that defines the vortex recirculation region, and :math:`W_c` is the
lateral width of the elliptical recirculation region. Within the
recirculation zone, the velocity is reversed and scaled linearly from
the reference wind speed near the wall to zero at the edge of the
ellipse.

Part (a) of Figure `[fig:street_vert] <#fig:street_vert>`__ show cell
type contour to represent the area of effect of the sidewall
parameterization in a horizontal plane at :math:`z=5` m. The rooftop
parameterization is applied to a rectangular building defined in Section
`4.3 <#sec:building>`__. The initial guess field is constructed using a
single sensor with logarithmic profile as defined in
`5.1 <#sec:sensor_xml>`__. Parts (b) and (c) of Figure
`[fig:sidewall_horiz] <#fig:sidewall_horiz>`__ indicate velocity
magnitude contour with overlaying velocity vectors of initial (part (b))
and final (part(c)) velocity fields in a horizontal plane at :math:`z=5`
m.

.. container:: float

   .. figure:: Images/sidewall_z_5_1_init_icell.png
      :width: 10.3cm

   .. figure:: Images/sidewall_z_5_1_init_vel.png
      :width: 11cm

   .. figure:: Images/sidewall_z_5_1_final.png
      :width: 11cm

In order to turn the algorithm on, the user needs to change the value of
"sidewallFlag" in the XML file.

.. code:: xml

   <simulationParameters>
       <sidewallFlag> 1 </sidewallFlag>                <!-- Sidewall flag (0-off, 1-on (default)) -->
   </simulationParameters>

Mass Consistent Solver
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

QES-Winds have mass conserving wind field solvers that rapidly compute
wind fields using a variational method rather than slower yet more
physics based solvers that include conservation of momentum
:cite:`kim2014effects`. While the QES-Winds method uses reduced order
physics in the numerical solution of urban flow problems, the solutions
are rapid and compare quite well higher order physics-based models in
both idealized :cite:`hayati2017comprehensive` and realistic urban
cities :cite:`neophytou2011inter`. The method minimizes the difference
between an initial wind field that is specified using empirical
parameterizations :cite:`singh2008evaluation` and the final wind fields.
The empirical parameterizations account for complex wind fields around
buildings such as wake cavities downstream of a building. To obtain a
quasi-time-averaged velocity field, QES-Winds uses a variational
analysis technique :cite:`singh2008evaluation`. This method requires the
solution of a Poisson equation for Lagrange multipliers, :math:`\lambda`
(Equation `[poisson] <#poisson>`__) in the following form:

.. math::

   \label{poisson}
   \frac{\partial^2\lambda}{\partial x^2} + \frac{\partial^2\lambda}{\partial y^2} + (\frac{\alpha_1}{\alpha_2})^2\:  \frac{\partial^2\lambda}{\partial z^2} = R

Where R is divergence of the initial wind field and is defined as:

.. math::

   \label{divergence}
    R = -2\,\alpha_1^2\,\Bigg[\frac{u_{i+1/2}^0-u_{i-1/2}^0}{\Delta x} + \frac{v_{j+1/2}^0-v_{j-1/2}^0}{\Delta y} + \frac{w_{k+1/2}^0-w_{k-1/2}^0}{\Delta z}\Bigg]

The final velocity field is updated using Euler-Lagrange equations:

.. math::

   \label{eu-lag1}
    u = u^0 + \frac{1}{2\,\alpha_1^2\,\Delta x}\,[\lambda_{i+1\,,j,\,k}-\lambda_{i,\,j,\,k}]

.. math::

   \label{eu-lag2}
    v = v^0 + \frac{1}{2\,\alpha_1^2\,\Delta y}\,[\lambda_{i,\,j+1,\,k}-\lambda_{i,\,j,\,k}]

.. math::

   \label{eu-lag3}
    w = w^0 + \frac{1}{2\,\alpha_2^2\,\Delta z}\,[\lambda_{i,\,j,\,k+1}-\lambda_{i,\,j,\,k}]

The Poisson equation is solved using the Successive Over-Relaxation
(SOR) method which is a variant of Gauss-Seidel method with faster
convergence. Applying SOR to Equation `[poisson] <#poisson>`__ results
in:

.. math::

   \label{SOR}
   \begin{split}
    \lambda_{i,\,j,\,k} & = \frac{\omega\Bigg[(\Delta x)^2 R_{i,\,j,\,k}+e\,\lambda_{i+1}+f\, \lambda_{i-1}+A(g\,\lambda_{j+1}+h\, \lambda_{j-1}) + B(m\,\lambda_{k+1}+n\, \lambda_{k-1})\Bigg]}{e+f+g+h+m+n}\\
    & +(1-\omega)\lambda_{i,\,j,\,k}
    \end{split}

Where e,f,g,h,m,n are boundary condition coefficients and A and B are
domain constants. :math:`\omega = 1.78` is the SOR relaxation factor.
The boundary condition for solid surfaces is
(:math:`\frac{\partial \lambda}{\partial n}=0`) and for inlet/outlet
surfaces it is :math:`\lambda=0`.

Solver Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^

QES-Winds has four options for solving the SOR equation discussed above,
the first option is to solve the equation on the CPU and the rest use
the GPU for computations. The GPU solvers are called: the dynamic
parallel, the global memory and the shared memory. The CPU solver is
quite rapid, but slow in comparison to the GPU solvers since it is a
serial solver and does not have parallel computing capabilities,
especially for large domains. For more information regarding different
types of solvers available in QES-Winds, read :cite:`Bozorgmehr2021`.
